India is endowed with extraordinarily diverse and distinctive traditional waterbodies found in different parts of the country, commonly known as ponds, tanks, lakes, vayalgam, ahars, bawdis, talabs and others.

They play an important role in maintaining and restoring the ecological balance. They act as sources of drinking water, recharge groundwater, control floods, support biodiversity, and provide livelihood opportunities to a large number of people.

Currently, a major water crisis is being faced by India, where 100 million people are on the frontlines of a nationwide water crisis and many major cities facing an acute water shortage.

The situation will worsen as United Nations and Niti Ayog reports say that the demand for water will reach twice the available supply, and 40 per cent of India’s population will not have access to clean drinking water by 2030.	

One of the reasons is our increasing negligence and lack of conservation of waterbodies. Since independence, the government has taken control over the waterbodies and water supply.

With a colonial mindset, authorities move further and further away in the quest of water supply, emphasing more on networks, infrastructure and construction of dams.

This, over time, has led to the neglect of waterbodies and catchments areas. As a result, we have started valuing land more than water.

In the last few decades, waterbodies have been under continuous and unrelenting stress, caused primarily by rapid urbanisation and unplanned growth. Encroachment of waterbodies has been identified as a major cause of flash floods in Mumbai (2005), Uttarakhand (2013), Jammu and Kashmir (2014) and Chennai (2015).

Further, waterbodies are being polluted by untreated effluents and sewage that are continuously being dumped into them. Across the country, 86 waterbodies are critically polluted, having a chemical oxygen demand or COD concentration of more than 250 mg/l, which is the discharge standard for a polluting source such as sewage treatment plants and industrial effluent treatment plants.
In urban India, the number of waterbodies is declining rapidly. For example, in the 1960s Bangalore had 262 lakes. Now, only 10 hold water.

Similarly, in 2001, 137 lakes were listed in Ahmedabad. However, by 2012, 65 were already destroyed and built upon.  Hyderabad is another example. In the last 12 years, it has lost 3,245 hectares of its wetlands.

The decline in both the quality and quantity of these waterbodies is to the extent that their potential to render various economic and environmental services has reduced drastically.

Although there are sufficient polices and acts for protection and restoration of waterbodies, they remain insufficient and ineffective.



The Ganges River is the most polluted river in India. The river is polluted with human waste, industrial waste, and agricultural runoff. The high levels of pollution in the river have caused serious health and environmental problems. The river is also a source of drinking water for millions of people, and the pollution has made the water unsafe for human consumption.

Pollution in India’s rivers is caused by many factors such as wastewater discharge from cities and industry, fertilizer and pesticide runoff from agriculture, and mining and oil drilling. The Ganges, India’s longest and holiest river, is the most polluted.

The Central Pollution Control Board of India reports that the Ganges River is among the world’s most polluted rivers. Sewage discharge, agricultural runoff, and industrial effluent contaminate the river with high levels of pollutants such as suspended solids, biochemical oxygen demand, and chemical oxygen demand.

These pollutants can cause health problems in people who come into contact with the river water, and they also kill fish and other aquatic life.

Water pollution is a big problem in India. There are many reasons for this.

One reason is that many people in India do not have access to clean water. This is because they live in rural areas where there is not enough infrastructure to provide clean water.

Another reason is that many people in India do not have access to proper sanitation. This means that they do not have toilets or places to dispose of their waste properly. This leads to a lot of waste being dumped into the country’s rivers and lakes.

Another reason is that India has a lot of industry. This means that there is a lot of pollution from factories.

Lastly, India is a very crowded country. This means that there is not much space for people to live and there is a lot of traffic. This leads to a lot of pollution from cars and trucks.

The most coliform polluted water bodies are Ganga, Yamuna, Yamunotri, Chambal, Mahi , Vardha and godavari.the coliform must be below 104mpn/100ml is absent from water for it to be considered fit for drinking water and general human use and for irrigation.

47 percent of water qualifying monitoring reported that coliform concentration  is above 500mpn/100.water monitoring station reported a coliform level above levels suggestions recent programme for infrastructure and upgrade treatment plant in India may be reversing the water pollution.

Contamination of water bodies such as rivers, lake groundwater etc is known as water pollution . WHO in 1992 had reported that 3119 towns and cities just 209 had partial water facilities. Downstream, the river water is getting polluted due to the untreated water used for drinking , bathing and washing.

Water is one of the main sources of human sustainability. There is 71% water which earth occupies and only 2.5% is used in drinking and other using purposes. Which is quite less amount to be used by crores of people. Water is not just used in drinking but mostly in everything even our body is made up of 70%of water. it’s used in household purposes like drinking and agricultural practices like irrigation etc etc. humans are using water promptly but they don’t realise its importance thats why now its becoming hard to get good water quality. The reason behind these all is also human activities construction activities in rivers causes rivers polluted and the industrial waste water which is released into it and several human waste discharge  ,whose tributaries somehow reaches farmers and that  toxicated water is then used by farmers in croups. It anyhow returns back to humans and makes it unhygienic and unfit to drink and even at times causes different hazardous diseases.

India health authorities have also taken different limited actions in tackling the public health impeding . Waste water undergoes any sort of treatment before being  discharged which is sent to a wretched stream of industrial effluent which contains  heavy metals and toxic effluent and this is with only 30% of water. Recognition of the water crisis is necessary for present human beings and the future generation to come.






Biodiversity represents a key point that underpins the ecosystem’s functions and processes that provide humans with necessary goods and services. Aquatic biodiversity can be defined as the variety of life and the ecosystems that make up the freshwater, tidal, and marine regions of the world, as well as all their interactions. The biodiversity of water bodies provides a number of services that affect human health and well-being directly and indirectly. For humans, aquatic ecosystems represent a source of water, food, materials as well as a room for recreation, commercial fishing, and tourism. Another huge importance of water bodies comes with the aquatic plants and animals and their ecological functions for our survival. Each day, aquatic organisms (bacteria and fungi) continually break down harmful toxins and nutrients that we flush into our sewage systems or discard directly into our rivers and streams. Some of the other very important benefits of blue spaces include flood prevention, trapping sediments and contaminants, retaining nutrients and maintaining biodiversity, which supports the ecosystem functions. A water body also represents a buffer for new diseases, it creates job opportunities in places rich in tourism and provides a source for medicine.The importance of bodies of water cannot be overstated and are part of our lives in many forms. Nowadays, when the world needs a solution to tackle climate change and food shortages, water bodies can be a part of that solution. Today, 75% of humanities’ food is generated from only 12 plants and five animal species, which makes the food system less resilient to diseases, pests, and climate change. .Many new researches can confirm that being surrounded by nature reduces stress levels and improves one’s mood and general mental health. Dr Mathew White, an environmental psychologist and a senior lecturer at the University of Exeter, conducted research about health and wellbeing benefits of blue spaces in 18 countries (mostly European) in his study. He explains three main reasons as to why the presence of water plays an important role in humans’ health, well-being, and happiness.



On October 31, the UN celebrates Cities Day to promote the interest in global urbanisation. Globally, more people live in urban areas than in rural areas, with 55 % of the world’s population residing in urban areas in 2018. In 1950, about 70% of the world’s population lived in rural settlements. By 2007, the year saw, for the first time in history, global urban populations exceeding global rural populations, and the amount of people living or moving to the cities has continued to grow at an even more rapid speed. It is projected that by 2050, the world will be more than two thirds urban (68%), roughly the reverse of the global rural-urban population distribution of the mid-twentieth century.

Moving to the cities can be for various reasons. Either there are better job opportunities, a pursuant for  education, or simply a preference for a technologically advanced lifestyle. For many living in rural regions, it can represent a life coupled with hardships and that of reduced opportunities for a diverse social life. 

Yet urbanisation has been necessary for the development of the world economy. In most parts of the world however, it has had a very unfavourable effect on environmental sustainability and surface water. Building up cities linked with higher water usage and increasing impervious layers result in the declination of water. Every day, cities across the world move 504 billion litres of water across 27,000km to hydrate their populations and industries. According to new World Resources Institute data, 17 countries around the world are currently under extremely high water stress, meaning they are using almost all the water they have.





Realising the seriousness of the problem confronting waterbodies, the Centre had launched the Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies' scheme in 2005 with the objectives of comprehensive improvement and restoration of traditional waterbodies.

These included increasing tank storage capacity, ground water recharge, increased availability of drinking water, improvement of catchment areas of tank commands and others. However, in this regard, not much has been seen on the ground.

Experts say that cities may not run out of water if urban planning engages more critically with the city’s terrain, along with propagation of knowledge about the local history of lakes, meaningful community engagement and ownership of waterbodies.
This is backed by the seminal publications of Delhi-based Centre for Science and Environment (a Global Think tank) such as Fourth Citizen's report: Dying Wisdom, Making Water Everybody’s Business: Policy and Practice of Water Harvesting and Excreta Matters, which talk about waterbodies being an important source of water, their protection through community management and the need of a comprehensive act for the protection of urban waterbodies.

The announcement of the Jal Shakti Abhiyan, a time-bound, mission-mode water conservation campaign initiated by the new Jal Shakti ministry is a welcoming step focussing on rainwater harvesting, rejuvenation of waterbodies, reuse of treated wastewater, and intensive afforestation.

It is of utmost importance for meeting the rising demand for water augmentation, improving the health of waterbodies as they provide various ecosystem services that are required to manage microclimate, biodiversity and nutrient cycling.

Many cities are working towards conservation of waterbodies like the steps initiated in the capital city of Delhi for instance. In turning Delhi into a city of lakes, rejuvenation of 201 waterbodies has been finalised.

Of these, the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) plans to revive 155 bodies while the Flood and Irrigation Department will revive 46. DJB claims that the aim is to achieve biological oxygen demand or BOD to 10ppm and total suspended solids to 10mg/l.

Also the establishment of the Wetlands Authority by the Delhi government is a welcome step towards notifying and conserving natural waterbodies.

In order to achieve the goal of revival of waterbodies, it is important to understand that one solution may not fit all the waterbodies. Depending on the purpose, ecological services, livelihood and socio-cultural practices, the approach will vary from one waterbody to another.

However the issues with regard to lack of data and action plans, encroachments, interrupted water flow from the catchment, siltation, violations of laws, solid waste deposit and polluted water, involvement of too many agencies, etc have to be taken into consideration.

Action needs to be taken towards:

1. Attaining sustainability. Thus, emphasis on long-term goals, operation and maintenance should be included along with the allocation of budget.

2. Success of the lakes should be tested on all three fronts namely economic, environmental and social. Many studies point that a deliberate effort has to be made on the social front for which better publicity of the environmental benefits of the project and enhancing environmental awareness, especially among the local community is required.

3. Encouraging local people to collaborate with other stakeholders to successfully utilise resources and ensure the protection and conservation of waterbodies.

Traditionally, water was seen as a responsibility of citizens and the community collectively took the responsibility of not only building but also of maintaining the waterbodies. This needs to be brought back into the system.

Thus, an integrated approach taking into account the long-term sustainability, starting from the planning stage where looking at every waterbody along with its catchment, is required.

To make it a reality, it is time to invest in governance, capacitating our institutions, strong regulations and enforcements or else we will fall back.

Let us not destroy our waterbodies in the name of development. Rather, we should value their importance. 





Defining water bodies

    The document designates water body as any natural or man-made structure used for storing water for various purposes, such as irrigation, industry, fish farming, domestic use, recreation, religious activities, and groundwater recharge
    Any structure that collects and stores water from melting ice, streams, springs, rain, or drainage from residential or other areas, or stores water diverted from a stream, nala, or river, is also considered a water body.

Categories of water bodies

    Ponds comprise 59.5%
    Tanks at 15.7%
    Reservoirs at 12.1%
    Water conservation projects such as percolation tanks and check dams at 9.3%
    Lakes at 0.9%
    Other types at 2.5%

State-wise distribution of water bodies

    West Bengal has the highest number of ponds and reservoirs.
    Andhra Pradesh hosts highest number of tanks.
    Tamil Nadu has the highest number of lakes.
    Maharashtra is leading in terms of water conservation initiatives.

Usage pattern of water bodies

    The majority of them are used for fish farming, with other uses being irrigation, replenishing groundwater, and providing water for household and drinking needs.
        About 55.5% are dedicated to fish farming
        16.5% to irrigation
        12.1% to groundwater replenishment
        10.1% to domestic and drinking water needs
        Remaining is used for recreational, industrial, religious and other purposes.

State-wise pattern of usage

    50% of the water bodies are used for fish farming in Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Tripura, Mizoram, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Assam and the eastern States of West Bengal and Odisha.
    Over 50% of the water bodies are used for irrigation in Gujarat, Telangana, Karnataka and Jharkhand.
    More than 50% are used for drinking in Manipur and Himachal Pradesh.
    Over 10% of the water bodies in Sikkim are used for recreational purposes.
    Over 50% of the water bodies in Uttarakhand, Punjab and Maharashtra are used for groundwater recharge.
    Industrial usage of water bodies is minimal in all the States.

Urban and rural distribution
Over 97.1% of water bodies can be found in rural regions while only 2.9% are located in urban areas.
Use: About 83.7% of water bodies are currently in use, while the rest are unused due to factors such as construction, siltation, irreparable damage, and industrial effluents.
Encroachment: A total of 1.6% water bodies have been encroached upon, of which 67.6% are ponds, 21% are tanks, and 4.5% involve water conservation schemes, check dams, or percolation tanks.
Ownership: Out of the total water bodies, 55.2% are privately owned; the rest are publicly owned.... Read more at: https://www.studyiq.com/articles/the-distribution-and-utilisation-of-water-bodies-in-india.
Water pollution refers to the contamination of water bodies such as rivers, lakes, oceans, and groundwater by harmful substances, making it unfit for human consumption or for supporting aquatic life. This environmental issue poses a significant threat to public health, ecosystems, and biodiversity. There are various sources of water pollution, including industrial discharges, agricultural runoff, sewage and wastewater, oil spills, and improper disposal of chemicals and plastics.

Industrial activities release pollutants like heavy metals, chemicals, and toxins into water bodies, leading to severe ecological imbalances. Agricultural runoff, containing pesticides, fertilizers, and herbicides, often find their way into nearby water sources, causing contamination. Sewage and wastewater from households and industries carry pathogens and organic matter, depleting oxygen levels in water and promoting the growth of harmful bacteria.

Oil spills, primarily caused by human activities like offshore drilling and transportation of oil, create devastating impacts on marine life, coating animals and plants with oil and disrupting entire ecosystems. Improper disposal of plastics and other non-biodegradable materials leads to the formation of floating garbage patches in oceans, endangering marine creatures that ingest or get entangled in the debris.

Water pollution not only affects aquatic life but also has far-reaching consequences on human health. Consuming contaminated water can lead to waterborne diseases such as cholera, dysentery, and giardiasis, causing widespread illness and even death, particularly in developing countries with limited access to clean water. Moreover, polluted water affects agriculture, as irrigation with contaminated water can lead to the accumulation of toxins in crops, posing risks to consumers.

Efforts to combat water pollution include the implementation of stringent environmental regulations, wastewater treatment plants, and public awareness campaigns about responsible waste disposal. Additionally, promoting sustainable agricultural practices, developing eco-friendly industrial technologies, and reducing the use of single-use plastics are crucial steps in mitigating this global crisis. International collaboration and strict enforcement of pollution control measures are essential to safeguard our water resources for current and future generations. Addressing water pollution demands a concerted effort from governments, industries, and individuals to preserve this vital natural resource and ensure a healthier, sustainable future for all.